---
layout: post
title: AppEngine OAuth contrib and refresh_token
date: 2016-12-28
comments: false
tags:
- appengine
- python
- datastore
- oauth
---
I thought I understood OAuth but had a bit of difficulty recently and it was all about how AppEngine and the [oauth contrib package](http://oauth2client.readthedocs.io/en/latest/source/oauth2client.contrib.appengine.html) and its decorators work so I thought I'd document here.

My app was working great. My OAuth credentials worked fine in dev and worked fine on prod too. But after a while the prod credentials stopped working. Finally I ended up at [this answer on stackoverflow](http://stackoverflow.com/a/16903181/1969871). Specifically notice the **Note/Gotcha** at the end. No problem I thought I'll just pass in `approval_prompt=force` and all will be well. BUT NO.

First I was using [oauth2client.contrib.appengine.oauth2decorator_from_clientsecrets](https://github.com/google/oauth2client/blob/a1136db/oauth2client/contrib/appengine.py#L892) which didn't allow me to pass in extra keyword arguments, once I switched to using
[oauth2client.contrib.appengine.OAuth2DecoratorFromClientSecrets](https://github.com/google/oauth2client/blob/a1136db/oauth2client/contrib/appengine.py#L827) it took my `approval_prompt` and admonished me that it's been changed to `prompt="consent"` but even with that it still didn't work. I added this code which helped a lot:

```python
    credentials = decorator.credentials
    if credentials.refresh_token is None:
      logging.error('Got credentials with no refresh_token.')
      return self.error(500)
```

On my dev instance my credentials were fine, but in production still no `refresh_token` even though I was passing in `prompt="consent"`. Turns out the AppEngine contrib package has ANOTHER layer of caching on top of memcache. So I needed to clear out CredentialsModel and memcache while we're at it and finally it worked. Here's the links for the [dev](http://localhost:8000/datastore?kind=CredentialsModel) and [production](cloud.google.com/datastore/entities/query?kind=CredentialsModel) datastores so you can clear yours out.
