---
comments: false
date: 2020-03-24
layout: post
permalink: /2020/03/itunes.html
tags:
- itunes
- applescript
- itdb
- mysql
- python
title: iTunes Library Organization and Cleanup
---
I've been organizing my iTunes library a little bit recently and it's led to some useful utilities that I'm sharing here.

First up I had a bunch of files that had the artist name inside the song name (as `ARTIST - TITLE`) and no artist in the artist field. Making a smart playlist where artist was empty and name had a `-` in allowed me to then make a manual playlist of the results. The I could go through it and remove the ones that wouldn't be fixed with a simple regex looking for the first dash. Mostly Jay-Z songs or ones where the artist was second.

I used what I learned from the [imdb_movie_ratings_adder](https://blog.wtwf.com/2019/09/add_imdb_movie_ratings.html) and held my nose and using Ruby I wrote [update_itunes_selection](https://gist.github.com/arkarkark/3ccc9697650c6e97778de128e5a73b30).

<style type="text/css">
  .gist-data {max-height: 500px;}
</style>

<script src="https://gist.github.com/arkarkark/3ccc9697650c6e97778de128e5a73b30.js"></script>

If you look at the end you'll see all the useful options and many of them use a RegexMatcher to take the name and find other fields in it. This ended up being super powerful and I find the `--artist-name` and `--season-episode` flags to be the most useful. It's nice that you can try it out on one or two songs before doing a whole bunch automatically. `--url-unescape` was useful for some songs which were filled with `%20` in the name.

I also had a few songs that I had downloaded off YouTube with [youtube-dl](https://github.com/ytdl-org/youtube-dl/) before I knew about the `--add-metadata` flag. BTW I have an alias called `ytmp3` that does this:
```
youtube-dl -w -i -x -o "%(playlist_index)02d-%(title)s.%(ext)s" --add-metadata --audio-format mp3
```
I find this very useful. Anyway if you don't do the `--add-metadata` flag then you end up with the youtube ID at the end of the song name. Now I had a regex I could fix this with but I needed to find all the songs. There's no nice way to find all the songs that end with `-` and eleven letters so I took another approach.

Using my iTunes MySQL loader [itdb](https://github.com/arkarkark/itdb/) I wrote a little utility to take random SQL and it would make a playlist in iTunes with the tracks from the SQL. This time I didn't want to write any Ruby since I had my database stuff already done in Python. So I used the Python version of [appscript](http://appscript.sourceforge.net/). But of course my old stuff was in Python2.x and that's deprecated and I always have a nightmare with the MySQLdb driver so I just used `2to3` to convert my scripts over to python3 and then fiddled with it to make it all work. The end result is [sql_to_playlist](https://github.com/arkarkark/itdb/blob/master/sql_to_playlist) and you use it like this:

```
./sql_to_playlist --playlist YouTube --sql="SELECT name, Persistent_ID FROM tracks WHERE name REGEXP '-[a-z0-9_-]{11}$';"
```

Next up was to find tracks that had the artist name in the track name. I first had to make a temp table of artists.

```sql
CREATE TABLE artists (
	id INT NOT NULL AUTO_INCREMENT PRIMARY KEY,
	name VARCHAR(1024) DEFAULT '',
	count INTEGER(4) DEFAULT 0
);

INSERT INTO artists (name, count) SELECT Artist, COUNT(*) FROM tracks WHERE LENGTH(artist) > 3 GROUP BY artist;
```

Then I could join it with the tracks table and find all the songs. Then I could manually clean up that new playlist for songs that I could easily automatically fix with [update_itunes_selection](https://gist.github.com/arkarkark/3ccc9697650c6e97778de128e5a73b30).

```
./sql_to_playlist --playlist "name with artist" --sql "SELECT t1.Persistent_id as Persistent_ID, t1.name, t1.artist FROM tracks AS t1 JOIN artists AS t2 ON t2.name = t1.artist AND LOCATE(t2.name, t1.name) > 0;"
```

Now that I've seen I can do everything in Python appscript that I could do in Ruby appscript I plan to reimplement those other two scripts so I never have to look at Ruby again.
